Documentation: API reference for portable stories (#26081)
storybookjs/storybook: docs/api/portable-stories-playwright.md

Normally, Storybok composes a story and its [annotations](#annotations) automatically, as part of the [story pipeline](#story-pipeline). When using stories in Playwright CT, you can use the [`createTest`](#createtest) function, which extends Playwright's test functionality to add a custom `mount` mechanism, to take care of the story pipeline for you.

## createTest

(⚠️ **Experimental**)

Instead of using Playwright's own `test` function, you can use Storybook's special `createTest` function which will extend Playwright's test functionality to add a custom `mount` mechanism which will load, render, and play the story. This function is experimental and is subject to changes.

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->

<CodeSnippets
  paths={[
    'react/portable-stories-playwright-ct.ts.mdx',
    'vue/portable-stories-playwright-ct.ts.mdx',
  ]}
/>

<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<Callout variant="warning">

Please note the [limitations of importing stories in Playwright CT](#importing-stories-in-playwright-ct).

</Callout>

### Type

```ts
createTest(
  baseTest: TK

> ) => TK

Reviewer: @yannbf — Not sure about the types here.

Author: Great question, these are types from the Playwright's test function, and the return type is also the type of a Playwright's test function, however with a different `mount` argument to that function. @JReinhold do you have any idea on how to present this here (and the TK's right below this comment) in a way that helps users?

Reviewer 2: So the "correct" type of this would be

```ts
import type { TestType } from '@playwright/experimental-ct-core';

createTest(
  baseTest: TestType
) => TestType
```

But that seems a little verbose for these docs maybe?
I suggest we reference the [Fixture documentation from Playwright](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-fixtures#creating-a-fixture), because that is actually what we do here, we override the base Fixture.

## Importing stories in Playwright CT

The code which you write in your Playwright test file is transformed and orchestrated by Playwright, where part of the code executes in Node, while other parts execute in the browser.

Because of this, you have to compose the stories _in a separate file than your own test file_:

```ts
// Button.portable.ts
// Replace <your-renderer> with your renderer, e.g. react, vue3
import { composeStories } from '@storybook/<your-renderer>';

import * as stories from './Button.stories';

// This function will be executed in the browser
// and compose all stories, exporting them in a single object
export default composeStories(stories);
```

You can then import the composed stories in your Playwright test file, as in the [example above](#createtest).

<Callout variant="info">

[Read more about Playwright's component testing](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-components#test-stories).

</Callout>

## Story pipeline

To preview your stories, Storybook runs a story pipeline, which includes applying project annotations, loading data, rendering the story, and playing interactions. This is a simplified version of the pipeline:

> ![TK - Proper alt text once proper image is in place](story-pipeline-playwright-ct.png)

Author: Reminder comment so we don't forget to change the alt text

(⚠️ **Experimental**)

<If notRenderer={SUPPORTED_RENDERERS}>

<Callout variant="info">

Portable stories are currently only supported in [React](?renderer=react) and [Vue](?renderer=vue) projects.

</Callout>

<!-- End non-supported renderers -->

</If>

<If renderer={SUPPORTED_RENDERERS}>

Portable stories are Storybook [stories](../writing-stories/index.md) which can be used in external environments, such as [Playwright Component Tests (CT)](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-components).

Normally, Storybok composes a story and its [annotations](#annotations) automatically, as part of the [story pipeline](#story-pipeline). When using stories in Playwright CT, you can use the [`createTest`](#createtest) function, which extends Playwright's test functionality to add a custom `mount` mechanism, to take care of the story pipeline for you.

<If renderer="react">

<Callout variant="warning">

**Using `Next.js`?** Next.js requires specific configuration that is only available in [Jest](./portable-stories-jest.md). The portable stories API is not supported in Next.js with Playwright CT.

</Callout>

</If>

## createTest

(⚠️ **Experimental**)

> Instead of using Playwright's own `test` function, you can use Storybook's special `createTest` function which will extend Playwright's test functionality to add a custom `mount` mechanism which will load, render, and play the story. This function is experimental and is subject to changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of using Playwright's own `test` function, you can use Storybook's special `createTest` function to extend Playwright's base fixture and override the `mount` function so it loads, renders, and plays the story. This function is experimental and is subject to changes.

Read more on extending base fixtures in [the Playwright documentation](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-fixtures#creating-a-fixture).
```

Reviewer: Thanks! I tweaked the wording slightly, so didn't accept the suggestion directly.
